---
id: governance
---

# On-Chain Governance

The relay chain's logic itself will need updating occasionally. The governance mechanism allows
Polkadot token holders to participate in the decision-making process rather than having any changes
to the system be imposed by a central authority { or in the case of some de- centralised systems, by
a team of developers. Too often, a contentious code change has led existing blockchains to an
impasse or a permanent fork. We want a mechanism that balances being able to make uncontentious
changes quickly when needed, while also providing the tools to deal with contentious proposals in a
decisive and fair manner. The ultimate arbiters of Polkadot are the DOT token holders and so all
important decisions, such as code changes, are made by state-weighted referenda. There is an elected
council, responsible for making smaller decisions and partially setting the priority for referenda,
in such a way that they cannot block a change that a majority wants.

Polkadot uses sophisticated mechanisms for Governance which allows it to evolve gracefully over time
at the ultimate behest of its assembled stakeholders. A key and unfailing rule is that all changes
to the protocol must be agreed upon by stake-weighted referendum { the majority of stake always
commands the network. In order to make any changes to the network, the idea is to bring DOT holders
together and administrate a network upgrade decision with the help of the Council (see Section
4.6.2). No matter whether the proposal is submitted by a DOT holder or by the Council, it will
ultimately have to go through a referendum to let all DOT holders, weighted by stake, make the
decision. Each DOT holder in Polkadot has the right to: a) submit a proposal, b) endorse a public
proposal to prioritise it in the referendum timetable, c) vote on all active referenda, d) become a
candidate for a seat in the Council, and e) vote on candidates for the Council. In addition, any DOT
holder may become a nominator or a validator candidate to participate in NPoS

## Forkless Upgrades through On-chain Governance

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3pAyvkgGLsU" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Self-Sustaining Blockchain

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/o--e-6J7C6o" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Polkadot Council

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/qpv0Bm_KyFY" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Turn out Biasing

Turnout biasing: It may seem restrictive to force a full stakeholder-based process to do some- thing
as little as, say, nudging the block time down by 5%. However, without this rule the network would
likely be unstable, as placing its control outside of the hands of stakeholders would create a
misalignment that may lead to inaction or worse. However, by taking advantage of the fact that
turnout is rarely 100%, we can effect different outcomes depending on the circumstances, crafting a
balance of power between active and passive stakeholders. For example, simple voting systems
typically introduce a notion of quorum, whereby a minimum amount of turnout must be reached before a
change is passed.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8CwYtcS5v18" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
