---
id: npos
sidebar_position: 3
---

# Nominated Proof of Staking

Polkadot's validators are selected by the NPoS scheme. Nominated Proof-of-Stake or NPoS is our
adaptation of PoS where an unlimited amount of token holders can participate as nominators, backing
with their stake a large but limited set of validators. This paradigm simultaneously achieves high
levels of security and scalability, as well as an unprecedented level of decentralization by
ensuring a property known in voting theory as proportional justified representation. Nominators, who
are economically vested in the security of the system, act as watchdogs over the validators'
performance. Based on the nominators' expressed preferences over candidates, every era the system
selects a set of validators with stake backings that are as high. and as evenly distributed as
possible. Nominators are also economically disincentivized from concentrating their votes on too few
validators, which helps keep the system decentralised over time.

Furthermore, the election mechanism is highly adaptive to sudden changes, such as some validators
being kicked out after a slashing, as it automatically redistributes the nominators' backings across
the new set of validators, even when the votes themselves do not change. The security goal of
Polkadot is to be Byzantine fault tolerant when the participants are rational (see Section 4.5 for
more details on incentives and economics). We assume that with the properties NPoS gives, the
stakeholders elect a set of validators that has a more than 2/3 fraction of honest members.

The elected validators are responsible for running the relay chain . While each parachain's
collators are responsible for generating parachain blocks, the validators are divided into rotating
subsets, one for each parachain, and need to attest to the validity of parachain blocks before the
headers of those blocks are included in the relay chain. To achieve good scalability the number of
validators in each of these subsets is small. Nonethe- less, thanks to the NPoS guarantee that every
validator is well backed, the availability and validity scheme can ensure that any attack on the
validity of Polkadot is very expensive in expectation. In fact, the entirety of Polkadot's economic
security backs every parachain. This is in stark contrast to having, say, 100 independent
blockchains with an equivalent sum total of stake, where on average each blockchain is backed by
1/100-th of the stake, and thus only benefits from 1/100-th the level of security. We guarantee
availability by using erasure coding of each parachain block to make the validators collectively and
robustly responsible for the availability of these blocks without breaking scalability.

## Proof of Stake (PoS) Overview

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/yKo6pvgbvD8" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Polkadot NPoS Algorithm Complexity

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/HdKEdD_Vdck" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Proof of Stake (PoS) vs Proof of Work (PoW)

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/6cdzD6lgOXE" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Phragmen

Our decentralisation objective translates into the classical notion of proportional representation
in voting theory. That is, a committee should represent each minority in the electorate proportional
to their aggregate vote strength (in this case, their stake), with no minority being
under-represented. We highlight here that nominators { and their lists of trusted candidates {
constitute a valuable gauge for the preferences of the general community, and that diverse pref-
erences and factions will naturally arise not only due to economical and security-related reasons,
but also political, geographical, etc. Such diversity of points of view is expected and welcome in a
decentralised community, and it is important to engage all minorities in decision-making processes
to ensure user satisfaction.

The goal of designing an electoral system that achieves proportional representation has been present
in the literature for a very long time. Of special note is the work of Scandinavian math- ematicians
Edvard Phragmén and Thorvald Thiele in the late nineteenth century. Very recently, there has been
considerable effort in the research community to formalise the notion of proportional
representation, and revisit the methods by Phragmén and Thiele and optimise them algorithmically.
Our validator selection protocol is an adaptation of Phragmén's methods and is guaranteed to observe
the technical property of proportional justified representation (PJR)
