---
id: interoperability
---

# Interoperability

## XCMP

If an account on one parachain sends tokens to another parachain, then XCMP ensures that this
message is delivered correctly. It is sent at a speed which is not dependent on how long it takes to
finalise blocks, which means that it needs to deal with the possibility of Polkadot forking. Thus we
optimistically execute based on the assumption that the parachain blocks are correct. If one is not,
then we need to revert and for that, it is important that parachains only receive messages that were
sent by blocks recorded on this new relay chain fork, and not the reverted fork. Thus we need that
the parachain and XCMP logic ensure that a fork of the relay chain defines a consistent history of
Polkadot and thus messages only arrive when they have been sent previously in the history defined by
this fork.

XCMP is the protocol that parachains use to send messages to each other. It aims to guarantee four
things: first that messages arrive quickly; second that messages from one parachain arrive to
another in order; third that arriving messages were indeed sent in the finalised history of the
sending chain; and fourth that recipients will receive messages fairly across senders, helping
guarantee that senders never wait indefinitely for their messages to be seen. There are two parts to
XCMP. (1) Metadata about outgoing messages for a parachain block are included on the relay chain and
later this metadata is used to authenticate messages by the receiving parachain. (2) The message
bodies corresponding to this metadata need to be actually distributed from the senders to the
recipients, together with a proof that the message body is actu- ally associated with the relevant
metadata. The details of distribution are covered as a networking protocol in Cross-chain message;
the remainder is covered below. The way relay chain blocks include headers of parachain blocks gives
a synchronous notion of time for parachain blocks, just by relay chain block numbers. Additionally
it allows us to authenticate messages as being sent in the history given by the relay chain i.e. it
is impossible that one parachain sends a message, then reorgs 2 so that that message was not sent,
but has been received. This holds even though the system may not have reached finality over whether
the message was sent, because any relay chain provides a consistent history. Because we require
parachains to act on every message eventually, non-delivery of a single message can potentially stop
a parachain from being able to build blocks. Consequently we need enough redundancy in our message
delivery system. Any validators who validate the PoV block should keep any outgoing messages from
that block available for a day or so and all full nodes of the sending parachain also store the
outgoing messages until they know they have been acted on.
